
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1
Investigation Title	Single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the human endometrium during the menstrual cycle
Comment[Submitted Name]	GSE111976-endometrium_MC
Experiment Description	To unbiasedly and systematically characterize endometrial transformation across the human menstrual cycle in preparation for embryo implantation, we analyzed the transcriptomic transformation of human endometrium at single cell resolution, dissecting multidimensional cellular heterogeneity of the tissue across the entire natural menstrual cycle.  We collected single cell transcriptome profile of endometrium biopsies sampled from 19 healthy and fertile females, at 4-27 days of their menstrual cycle.  10x dataset - collected to validate main findings drawn from the original C1 dataset of this study. In this dataset, we collected additional data from 10 endometrial biopsies using the 10x Chromium system. Importantly, we collected both C1 and 10x data for two biopsies, one from mid-secretory phase and the other early-secretory. They served as anchors for a direct comparison between the two datasets, and were referred as 'anchor biopsies' in the manuscript of this study. Biopsies in the 10x dataset were obtained following the same protocol used for the C1 dataset, as described in the manuscript.
Public Release Date	2021-06-29
Person First Name	Wanxin	Felipe	Pilar	Inmaculada	Marco	Alina	Wenying	Carlos	Stephen	Ray
Person Last Name	Wang	Vilella	Alama	Moreno	Mignardi	Isakova	Pan	Simon	Quake	Stefancsik
Person Mid Initials									R	
Person Email										
Person Affiliation	Stanford University	Stanford University	Igenomix Foundation, INCLIVA Health Research Institute	IVI Valencia	Chan Zuckerberg Biohub	Stanford University	Stanford University	Stanford University	Stanford University	EMBL-EBI
Person Address	Stanford	Stanford	Valencia	Valencia	San Francisco	Stanford	Stanford	Stanford	Stanford	Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA
Person Roles										
Protocol Type	sample collection protocol	enrichment protocol	enrichment protocol	nucleic acid library construction protocol	nucleic acid sequencing protocol
Protocol Name	P-HCAD23-1	P-HCAD23-2	P-HCAD23-3	P-HCAD23-4	P-HCAD23-5
Protocol Description	Informed written consent was obtained from each donor in her natural menstrual cycle (no hormone stimulation) before an endometrial biopsy was performed. Biopsies in the 10x dataset were obtained and dissociated following the protocol used for the C1 dataset.	A two-stage dissociation protocol was used to dissociate endometrium tissue and separate it into stromal fibroblast- and epithelium-enriched single-cell suspensions. Before dissociation, the tissue was rinsed with DMEM (Sigma) on a Petri dish to remove blood and mucus. Excess DMEM was removed after rinsing. The tissue was then minced into pieces as small as possible and dissociated in collagenase A1 (Sigma) overnight at 4 °C in a 50-ml Falcon tube in the horizontal position. This primary enzymatic step dissociates stromal fibroblasts into single cells while leaving epithelial glands and lumen mostly undigested. The resulting tissue suspension was then briefly homogenized and left unagitated for 10 min in a 50-ml Falcon tube in the vertical position, during which epithelial glands and lumen sedimented as a pellet and stromal fibroblasts remained suspended in the supernatant. The supernatant was therefore collected as the stromal fibroblast-enriched suspension. The pellet was washed twice in 50 ml of DMEM to further remove residual stromal fibroblasts. The washed pellet was then dissociated in 400 μl of TrypLE Select (Life technology) for 20 min at 37 °C, during which homogenization was performed via intermittent pipetting. DNaseI (100 μl) was then added to the solution to digest extracellular genomic DNA. The digestion was quenched with 1.5 ml of DMEM after 5 min of incubation. The resulting cell suspension was then pipetted, filtered through a 50-μm cell strainer and centrifuged at 1,000 r.p.m. for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended as the epithelium-enriched suspension.	A two-stage dissociation protocol was used to dissociate endometrium tissue and separate it into stromal fibroblast- and epithelium-enriched single-cell suspensions. Before dissociation, the tissue was rinsed with DMEM (Sigma) on a Petri dish to remove blood and mucus. Excess DMEM was removed after rinsing. The tissue was then minced into pieces as small as possible and dissociated in collagenase A1 (Sigma) overnight at 4 oC in a 50-ml Falcon tube in the horizontal position. This primary enzymatic step dissociates stromal fibroblasts into single cells while leaving epithelial glands and lumen mostly undigested. The resulting tissue suspension was then briefly homogenized and left unagitated for 10 min in a 50-ml Falcon tube in the vertical position, during which epithelial glands and lumen sedimented as a pellet and stromal fibroblasts remained suspended in the supernatant. The supernatant was therefore collected as the stromal fibroblast-enriched suspension. The pellet was washed twice in 50 ml of DMEM to further remove residual stromal fibroblasts. The washed pellet was then dissociated in 400 μl of TrypLE Select (Life technology) for 20 min at 37 °C, during which homogenization was performed via intermittent pipetting. DNaseI (100 μl) was then added to the solution to digest extracellular genomic DNA. The digestion was quenched with 1.5 ml of DMEM after 5 min of incubation. The resulting cell suspension was then pipetted, filtered through a 50-μm cell strainer and centrifuged at 1,000 r.p.m. for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended as the epithelium-enriched suspension.	GEM generation and barcoding, reverse-transcription, cDNA generation were done following the manufacturer’s protocol (Single cell 3’ reagent kits v3.1, Chromium Next GEM Chip G, 10x Genomics). Library construction were done following the manufacture’s protocol (Single cell 3’ reagent kits v3.1, Chromium Next GEM Chip G, 10x Genomics).	Dual-indexed, single-cell libraries were pooled and sequenced in paired-end reads on Novaseq (Illumina).
Protocol Hardware					Illumina NovaSeq 6000
Term Source Name	EFO	ArrayExpress
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/
Comment[AEExperimentType]	RNA-seq of coding RNA from single cells
Experimental Factor Name	menstrual	cycle	day
Experimental Factor Type	menstrual	cycle	day
Comment[EAAdditionalAttributes]
Comment[EACurator]	AD
Comment[EAExpectedClusters]	
Comment[ExpressionAtlasAccession]	E-HCAD-23
Comment[HCALastUpdateDate]	2021-02-12
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	379ed69e-be05-48bc-af5e-a7fc589709bf	GSE111976
Comment[EAExperimentType]	differential
SDRF File	E-HCAD-23.sdrf.txt
